---
title:   The Little Mavericks That Could
date:    2013-11-12
excerpt: I jumped on the OSX 10.9 upgrade bandwagon sooner than I had originally intended. I am constantly switching operating systems, so my curiosity (and endless restore points) got the best of me, and I jumped in head-first. I was not disappointed.
art:     mavericks
---

When Mavericks was announced back in June, it ignited a spark of hope deep
inside of me. After Lion, I lost all respect for OSX, and got to the point of
not owning a single Apple product; I abandoned ship, so-to-speak.

However, with Mavericks, Apple promised improvements to the--wait for
it--*kernel*. Along with iBooks, Maps, and a bunch of other garbage came one of
the best decisions Apple has ever made: focus on the kernel.

I love the fact OSX is based on BSD. It could be one of the most redeeming
features about it, along with the UI/UX. However, the Mach kernel is old, and
God knows how long Apple has let it stagnate. I think some of the improvements
they made for iOS (as iOS runs an ARM port of Mach) have finally made their way
back to mainline: power savings, sandboxing, memory compression... All of these
features make sense in a mobile context, and I bet that's where they were
birthed.

I began using OSX during the Snow Leopard days, and I can say, with confidence,
that Snow Leopard was one of the best computing experiences I have had to-date.
Lion and Mountain Lion never lived up to the polish and stability of Snow
Leopard. I am not alone on this: I know a few people who are still on Snow
Leopard because they were disheartened with the "improvements" of 10.7-onwards.

However, Mavericks changes this. For the first time since I turned on my first
iMac, I truly *enjoy* using OSX. I've used it full time (even on my desktop at
home) for pretty much everything, except gaming, and I love it. The improvements
they've made are truly just that: improvements. Unlike Lion, the improvements in
Mavericks are worthwhile and add to the experience.

The only complaint I can muster is the bloat, but that has been a complaint of
mine for eternity. I don't want iBooks, Maps, Mail, Messages, iTunes, Reminders,
Notes, etc. If there was a "developer" spin of OSX where I could get the core
OS, Safari, and the Utilities folder, I would be perfectly content.

---

Apple is taking a step in the right direction. They stumbled with Lion, and fell
on their face in Mountain Lion, but now they're starting to pick themselves up.

I hope Mavericks is a sign of what's to come in OSX: stability and polish. Those
two things are what made Snow Leopard the best release of OSX, and perhaps it is
those two things that will cause 10.10 to be regarded just as highly.

---

In conclusion, **I like Mavericks a lot**. I think it is one of the best
releases of OSX I have used, and I have committed to using it full-time. I
really hope this re-kindled respect for Apple doesn't fall flat&hellip;
